
INTRODUCTION
Mao Ch’eng Chi, or City of Cats, is a social and political satire. Written in the early 1930's，it is a thinly disguised representation of contemporary China. The “Cat City” of the title is the capital of Catland, on the planet Mars, a country whose inhabitants look like cats but behave like men-men whose civilization is dying. Catland has the longest history and the most ancient culture of any country on Mars, but this culture is now in the last stages of disintegration. The society of the country has been completely debilitated by consumption of an enervating leaf which produces all the effects we associate with opium, but which is also a symbol of something even more harmful. The educational system has, after fruitless attempts at modernization, fallen into complete ruin. In political and economic affairs there is nothing but contention and superficial attempts to imitate the systems of neighboring countries, the most recently discovered of these systems and the one that is currently the rage among the revolutionists being one in which “everybody works for everybody” and the laborers and peasants are the chosen members of society. Military and government officials are self-seeking profiteers, completely unconcerned about the welfare of the people of the country, and the “nationis” rapidly preparing itself for annihilation at the hands of the least progressive of its scientific fellow nations.
One need not read far in the history of “modern” China to find parallels for the ills ascribed to Catland. In the second and third decades of this century China was in political and economic chaos. A land with a long history as the unchallenged cultural center of Asia, it had not been able to adjust to the changes that were being brought about in the world by the countries of the West, where there had been an industrial revolution and the birth of a “scientific age,” and by her next-door neighbor, Japan, which country had been quick to learn the techniques and ideas of the new age. China had overthrown her old system of monarchial government but had not succeeded in replacing it with a republican form--or any other form. She had abandoned her traditional methods of education, but she had not been able to set up a new System. The masses of the people were poverty-stricken, ignorant and passive. The people who had power were factional and, for the most part, interested primarily in personal gain. Movements for modernization and emancipation from the yoke of foreign oppression swept the country, sometimes violently, but without accomplishing much. There were those who were sincere in their desire to work for country rather than self, but they were unable to bring about the changes that would have to come before China could be a “modern nation.” When Japan invaded Manchuria in September of 1931, China could only protest to the world and call feebly for help in throwing the aggressor out. When in January of 1932 the Japanese gave the mayor of Shanghai the choice of calling an end to the boycott of Japanese goods there or seeing Japanese troops moved into the city, the mayor declared the boycott at an end and saw Japanese troops moved into the city.
This is the China which Lao Sheh (i.e., Shu Ch’ing-ch’un), in City of Cats, is holding up to 
ridicule, trying to stir his fellow Chinese by venom to realization of its imminent destruction and to action to prevent this destruction. 
Lao Sheh claims that this work is a failure. He says that in writing it he made the mistake of abandoning the humorous style for which he had a special talent, and therefore, as he lacked the “fierce pen and brilliant mind" necessary to write goog satire without humor, ”City of Cats could not but crawl on the ground like a bird with a broken wing. He says that the work has the common fault of satires--lack of positive proposals and constructive ideas--and it really accomplished nothing except to show the author's disappointment with existing conditions. And that though “I am pot willing to admit to being a genuine idiot, yet, as I wrote City of Cats, I must call myself a fool.” 
The author is of course being very modest. As far as literary quality goes, City of Cats is not the best of his works. The style is excessively repetitious and is sometimes confused. The novel as a whole should have been more carefully constructed, and the satire is not as subtle as that of the better satirists in Western literature. Nor did publication of the work cure China’s ills. It is, however, solid evidence of the author’s perspicacity and an unquestionably apt satirization of the China of that time--and that, after all, is what it was intended to be.
There are parallels in the history of China in the first thirty years of this century for the characterizations and descriptions found on nearly every page of City of Cats. A thorough comparison and exposition of these parallels would make a paper as long as the translation itself. I have been content to note a few comparisons, more or less at random, between the affairs and events described in City of Cats and Chinese affairs and events as described in various non-fiction publications. These will be found at the end of the translation.
JAMES E. DEW
1958
Post scriptum: Since the above was written, I have seen Professor Cyril Birch’s excellent “Lac Sheh: The Humourist in his Humour” (China Quarterly No. 8 (1961) 45-62 where he says much of what I have tried to say, only better.

Notes： The time of writing is probably 1932. Most of the references I have found (e.g., Chao Yen-sheng in the "Short Biographies of Authors" section of Father Joseph Schyns" 1500 Modern Chinese Novels & Plays, p. 84, and Jean Monsterleet in Sommets de la Littérature chinoise contemporaine, p. 155) give 1933 as the date of first publication. The author himself says that it was first serialized in Hsien-tai magazine then published in book form by the Hsien-tai Book Company. He does not give a date, but says that City of Cats was written at the request of the editor of that magazine for a novel for serial publication, and remarks that after the Battle of Shanghai (Hu chan) Hsien-tai was the only literary monthly of quality being published. From this I judge that it was after the Japanese attack on Shanghai early in 1932 that the novel was written. The date 1933 given by the sources mentioned above probably refers to the first publication in book form. 
Pére Henri van Boven, in his Histoire de la Littérature chinoise moderne, says that Lao Sheh published City of Cats in 1925, during his stay in London, but this early date seems quite unlikely, because of internal evidence as well as external. As pointed out above, the writing of the novel must have followed the Japanese attack on Shanghai. Also, the author indicates that City of Cats was written after Ta-ming Hu, which itself was written while the author was in Chinan, after his return from England (Ibid., p. 37). As internal evidence of a date later than 1925, we have the description (Ch. 18) of Catland’s Red Rope Army, the counterpart of which did not exist in China before 1927. Also, I think it is very likely that when the author wrote of Catland’s invasion by dwarf soldiers from another country he had uppermost in his mind Japan’s invasion of Manchuria, 
attack on Shanghai, and continued pressure on China.
