
Lao She was born Shu Qingchun in 1899 to a poor Manchu family in Beijing. His father was a Bannerman, an imperial guard of the Qing court,who died fighting in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900.
Lao She left China in his mid-twenties to teach Chinese at the University of London where he would remain for the next five years. His first book,The Philosophy of Lao Chang, appeared in Fiction Monthly in 1926 and Mr. Ma and Son, his third and final novel written during his London years, was serialised in 1929.
He continued to teach and write upon his return to China and had, by then, become an established author known for his humorist style. In 1932, he ventured into the realm of satire and science fiction with Cat Country and three years later he published Rickshaw Boy, the story of a local Beijing rickshaw puller, widely regarded as his most accomplished novel.
Throughout the fifties, he continued to write, producing novels, non-fiction works and the notable play, Teahouse. In the sixties, he was labelled an anti-Maoist and a counter-revolutionary by militant Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution. In August 1966, Lao She committed suicide in Beijing.
William A. Lyell, Ph.D., studied Chinese at Yale University and served in the Korean War as an interpreter and soldier. He was a professor of Chinese at Stanford University for over thirty years where much of his research focused on modern Chinese literature. His previously translated works include Blades of Grass: The Stories of Lao She by Lao She, The Diary of a Madman and Other Stories by Lu Xun, Shanghai Express: A Thirties Novel by Zhang Henshui, and he is the author of Lu Hsün’s Vision of Reality.
Ian Johnson is a journalist, author and literary critic based in Beijing and Berlin. He served as a correspondent in China for Baltimore’s The Sun, The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times. He won the Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of China and was a Nieman Fellow at Harvard University. He is the author of Wild Grass: Three Stories of Change in Modern China and A Mosque in Munich: Nazis, the CIA, and the Rise of the Muslim Brotherhood in the West. He is a regular contributor to The New York Review of Books.
